doc/haskell: begin bringing back haskell documentation to the nixpkgs manual (#126674)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/languages-frameworks/haskell.section.md

# Haskell {#sec-haskell}

The Haskell infrastructure in nixpkgs has two main purposes: The
primary purpose is to provide a Haskell compiler and build tools
as well as infrastructure for packaging Haskell-based packages.

The secondary purpose is to provide support for Haskell development
environment including prebuilt Haskell libraries. However, in this
area sacrifices have been made due to self-imposed restrictions in
nixpkgs, to lessen the maintenance effort and improve performance.
Therefore it may be advantageous to use an alternative to the
Haskell infrastructure in nixpkgs for development environments in
many cases. The main limitations are that we only provide first-class
support for the default compiler (currently GHC 8.10.4) and usually

> only provide a default and (if different) the latest version of

Reviewer: latest being hackage (!= hackage) ?

Reviewer: it's explained later on so I understand that if the package is on stackage, then the version is not necessarily the latest ?

Author: Yeah, I want to explain this in more detail in the section “Package Set Generation”. Basically we use the latest version of every package from hackage by default unless it is part of stackage or there has been a pin manually set up. In those cases we use the manual version constraint or the one from stackage to get the version of the standard attribute and additionally generate an attribute `package-name_A_B_C_D` which points to the latest version from hackage.

# Haskell {#sec-haskell}

The Haskell infrastructure in nixpkgs has two main purposes: The primary purpose
is to provide a Haskell compiler and build tools as well as infrastructure for
packaging Haskell-based packages.

The secondary purpose is to provide support for Haskell development environment
including prebuilt Haskell libraries. However, in this area sacrifices have been
made due to self-imposed restrictions in nixpkgs, to lessen the maintenance
effort and improve performance. Therefore, it may be advantageous to use an
alternative to the Haskell infrastructure in nixpkgs for development
environments in some cases. The main limitations are that we only provide

> first-class support for the default compiler (currently GHC 8.10.7) and usually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
first-class support for the default compiler (currently GHC 9.0.2) and usually
```

or maybe we remove this line? I feel like it will bite us over and over?

Author: Thanks, updated references to 8.10.7. I think it's fine once we've merged since I at least always do a grep over the repo to find references to the old GHC version; e.g. module docs already reference ghc vresions today, so there's always something to update.

haskellPackages.AAI                                                         AAI-0.2.0.1
haskellPackages.abacate                                                     abacate-0.0.0.0
haskellPackages.abc-puzzle                                                  abc-puzzle-0.2.1
haskellPackages.abcBridge                                                   abcBridge-0.15
…
```

The attribute names in `haskellPackages` always correspond with their name on
hackage. Since hackage allows names that are not valid nix without extra
escaping, you sometimes need to extra care when handling attribute names like
`3dmodels`.

For packages that are part of stackage, we use the version that is currently
part of [Stackage Nightly][stackage-nightly] as the default
version. For all other packages we use the latest version from Hackage.
Sometimes alternative versions of packages are provided whose attribute names
are their normal name with their version appended after an underscore, e.g.
`Cabal_3_4_0_0`. If you are interested in details how the package set is
populated, read the section [Package set
generation](#sec-haskell-package-set-generation).

> Most of the packages contained in `haskellPackages` don't actually build and are

Author: Right!

* These attributes are populated with a default value if omitted:
    * `homepage`: defaults to the hackage page for `pname`.
    * `platforms`: defaults to `lib.platforms.all` (since GHC can cross-compile)
* These attributes are only passed if given:
    * `description`
    * `license`
    * `changelog`
    * `maintainers`
    * `broken`
    * `hydraPlatforms`

## Development environments {#sec-haskell-development-environments}

In addition to building and installing Haskell software, nixpkgs can also
provide development environments for Haskell projects. This has the obvious
advantage that you benefit from `cache.nixos.org` and no longer need to compile
all project dependencies yourself.

Our main objective with `haskellPackages` is to package Haskell software in
nixpkgs. This entails some limitations, partially due to self-imposed
restrictions of nixpkgs, partially in the name of maintainability:

* Only the packages built with the default compiler see extensive testing of the
  whole package set. The experience using an older or newer packaged compiler
  may be worse.

* We aim for a “blessed” package set which only contains one version of each

>   package.

Author: I have added a TODO for this, since I can't muster the energy to do this right now. I think it'll go away anyways when a Package Set Generation section is added.

Thus, to get the best experience, make sure that your project can be compiled
using the default compiler of nixpkgs and recent versions of its dependencies.
“Recent” can either mean the version contained in a certain Stackage snapshot
(the latest lts or nightly one) <!-- TODO(@sternenseemann): document our use of solvers -->
or the latest version from Hackage. Similarly to Stackage, we sometimes
intervene and downgrade packages to ensure as many packages as possible can
be compiled together.

In particular, it is not possible to get the dependencies of a legacy project
from nixpkgs or to use a specific stack solver for compiling a project.

Now for the actual development environments: By default every derivation built
using [`haskellPackages.mkDerivation`](#haskell-mkderivation) exposes an

> environment suitable for building it interactively as the `env` attribute. For

Author: Done in 18ea31126f04dd9820430781ade74dd54f9824b5

example, if you have a local checkout of `random`, you can enter a development
environment for it like this (if the dependencies in the development and
packaged version match):

```console
$ cd ~/src/random
$ nix-shell -A haskellPackages.random.env '<nixpkgs>'
[nix-shell:~/src/random]$ ghc-pkg list
/nix/store/5pss2hw4qlmc4xj7ybp2x16c29ccv47x-ghc-8.10.7-with-packages/lib/ghc-8.10.7/package.conf.d
    Cabal-3.2.1.0
    array-0.5.4.0
    base-4.14.3.0
    binary-0.8.8.0
    …
    ghc-8.10.7
    …
```

> As you can see, the environment contains a GHC which is , so it finds all

Author: Thanks,  fixed!

dependencies of `random`. Since nixpkgs only relies on `Setup.hs` for actually
building the package, the environment doesn't contain familiar development tools
like `cabal-install`. If you have it installed on your system anyway, it will
work as expected in the `nix-shell` (as long as you don't use `--pure`).

<!-- TODO(@sternenseemann): this doesn't work in practice (anymore?)

You can make sure that `cabal-install` doesn't download or build any packages
not provided using Nix by passing `--offline`. There is of course a better way
to add any number of development tools to your `nix-shell` which we'll discuss

> later. -->

Author: Noted.

removing any Hackage revisions.

`generateOptparseApplicativeCompletions list drv`
: Generate and install shell completion files for the installed executables whose
names are given via `list`. The executables need to be using `optparse-applicative`
for this to work.

`justStaticExecutables drv`
: Only build and install the executables produced by `drv`, removing everything
that may refer to other Haskell packages' store paths (like libraries and
documentation). This dramatically reduces the closure size of the resulting
derivation. Note that the executables are only statically linked against their
Haskell dependencies, but will still link dynamically against libc, GMP and
other system library dependencies.

`enableSeparateBinOutput drv`
: Install executables produced by `drv` to a separate `bin` output. This
has a similar result as `justStaticExecutables`, but preserves the libraries
and documentation in the `out` output alongside the `bin` output with a
much smaller closure size.

`markBroken drv`
: Sets the `broken` flag to `true` for `drv`.

`unmarkBroken drv`
: Set the `broken` flag to `false` for `drv`.

> 

Author: I've changed it to `markUnbroken` now, I think just documenting one of the two is better, since it implies deprecation of the other subtly.

> 

Author: 343c9132a138a9931ff2a8e0d02e38acccd542eb

<!-- Purposefully omitting the non-list variants here. They are a bit
ugly, and we may want to deprecate them at some point. -->

`appendConfigureFlags list drv`
: Adds the strings in `list` to the `configureFlags` argument for `drv`.

`enableCabalFlag flag drv`
: Makes sure that the Cabal package `flag` is enabled in Cabal's configure step.

`disableCabalFlag flag drv`
: Makes sure that the Cabal package `flag` is disabled in Cabal's configure step.

`appendBuildflags list drv`
: Adds the strings in `list` to the `buildFlags` argument for `drv`.

<!-- TODO(@sternenseemann): removeConfigureFlag -->

`appendPatches list drv`
: Adds the `list` of derivations or paths to the `patches` argument for `drv`.

<!-- TODO(@sternenseemann): link dep section -->

`addBuildTools list drv`
: Adds the `list` of derivations to the `buildTools` argument for `drv`.

`addExtraLibraries list drv`
: Adds the `list` of derivations to the `extraLibraries` argument for `drv`.

`addBuildDepends list drv`
: Adds the `list` of derivations to the `buildDepends` argument for `drv`.

`addTestToolDepends list drv`
: Adds the `list` of derivations to the `testToolDepends` argument for `drv`.

> `addPkgConfigDepends list drv`

Reviewer 3: The `C` in `Config` should be lowercase: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/development/haskell-modules/lib/compose.nix#L167

Ran into this typo when I copy-pasted from the document today.
